crates.io: Add development update blog post (#1882)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: content/crates-io-development-update-2026-07/index.md

+++
path = "2026/07/13/crates-io-development-update"
title = "crates.io: development update"
authors = ["Tobias Bieniek"]

[extra]
team = "the crates.io team"
team_url = "https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/crates-io"
+++

Another six months have passed since our [last development update](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2026/01/21/crates-io-development-update/), and the crates.io team has been busy. Here's a summary of the most notable changes and improvements made to [crates.io](https://crates.io/) since then.

## Source Code Viewer

> Crate pages now have a "Code" tab that lets you browse the contents of published crate versions directly on crates.io. This shows you the exact files that cargo downloads when you add a crate as a dependency, not whatever happens to be in the linked repository. This makes it much easier to audit your dependencies, including files that never appear in the repository, like the normalized `Cargo.toml` files that `cargo` generates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crate pages now have a "Code" tab that lets you browse the contents of published crate versions directly on crates.io. This shows you the exact files that cargo downloads when you add a crate as a dependency, which might differ from the linked repository. This makes it much easier to audit your dependencies, including files that never appear in the repository, like the normalized `Cargo.toml` files that `cargo` generates.
```
less aggressive tone. Wdyt?

> Crate pages now have a "Code" tab that lets you browse the contents of published crate versions directly on crates.io. This shows you the exact files that cargo downloads when you add a crate as a dependency, not whatever happens to be in the linked repository. This makes it much easier to audit your dependencies, including files that never appear in the repository, like the normalized `Cargo.toml` files that `cargo` generates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Crate pages now have a "Code" tab that lets you browse the contents of published crate versions directly on crates.io. This shows you the exact files that `cargo` downloads when you add a crate as a dependency, not whatever happens to be in the linked repository or what gets conditionally built in the targets docs.rs builds. This makes it much easier to audit your dependencies, including files that never appear in the repository, like the normalized `Cargo.toml` files that `cargo` generates.
```

Edited to make an instance of `cargo` in code formatting; it should either be that or "Cargo". Also edited to compare with docs.rs and point out this avoids the issues pointed out in https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/source-code-on-docs-rs-ambiguous-and-obscure/24438

I like @marcoieni's suggestion too. Could also change that further to say "which might differ from the linked repository (if there is one)" or something to indicate that this is also useful when there isn't a repo

Reviewer 2: Ah caught up on the comments on the internals thread; could also point out that this is pre-macro-expansion (to further explain how this differs from the source code on docs.rs)

Author: > could also point out that this is pre-macro-expansion (to further explain how this differs from the source code on docs.rs)

I'm not sure I understand this part. docs.rs does not expand macros either, or am I missing something? 😅

Reviewer 2: one of the two source views on docs.rs does do expansion-- from that thread:

> I am not sure what else can be done but to raise awareness that "source" links on docs.rs show post-expansion code. We probably do not want to lose the various doc generation conveniences for code generated with build.rs and/or macros.

Author: I'm assuming that means build.rs expansion, but I'd be quite surprised if they would expand all macros including e.g. `Debug` and friends 🤔

Author: (resolving the thread so that the blog post can be merged)

![Source code viewer showing the "Code" tab of the serde crate](code-tab.png)

The viewer comes with a file tree sidebar with search functionality, syntax highlighting, and GitHub-style line selection, where clicking or dragging line numbers produces shareable `#L10-L20` URLs.

> Under the hood, the server now builds a zip file for every published version. Since the `.crate` files that cargo consumes are gzipped tarballs without random access support, a background job re-packs each of them into a seekable zip archive plus a JSON manifest describing the contained files. Both are served from our static CDN. The frontend then fetches only the manifest and loads each file on demand with an HTTP range request. Because of this architecture, browsing crate sources essentially adds no load on the crates.io API servers. Existing crate versions have been backfilled, so this works for old releases too.

Reviewer 3: Did we make the underlying zip "public" and it's now potentially depended on by others?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1882/71b9b153b988554cb5541bc366d88268b581b5fb..5bfa5f6805e4e8d6a3e987d2145563aa4763630d)*

Author: @syphar mentioned interest from the docs.rs side and might already be using it too. the paths are public in the sense that our production frontend is requesting them, so anyone looking at the devtools could see them. I don't think there is much value in hiding them at this point.

Reviewer 4: I guess the question is more around what guarantees, if any, we want to make around the existence and structure of the zip files. Which I'm guessing the answer is "not many, if any", but I don't know how we'd document that.

Reviewer 5: My general thoughts on any guarantees:

* If its not documented in the [Data Access Policy](https://crates.io/data-access) then use at your own risk.
* For anyone looking to rely on undocumented resources or behavior, please reach out so we can get a sense of their use case.
* For specific integration points with official rust projects, the team could commit to closer collaboration or minimal deprecation periods on an as needed basis.

Author: (resolving the thread so that the blog post can be merged)

The rendering library behind the code viewer is a diff renderer at heart, and that's no accident: a version-to-version diff viewer built on the same infrastructure is currently in the works. This will allow you to review exactly what changed between two published versions, right on crates.io. Stay tuned!

## Untangling crates.io Accounts from GitHub

> At the end of May, [RFC #3946](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3946) was accepted by the crates.io team. Since the very beginning, crates.io accounts have been tightly coupled to GitHub: signing in means "Log in with GitHub", and your crates.io identity is your GitHub username. The RFC changes that. It introduces usernames that are native to crates.io and independent of any linked GitHub account, as a prerequisite for eventually supporting login via other identity providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of May, the crates.io team accepted [RFC #3946](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3946). Crates.io accounts always have been tightly coupled to GitHub: signing in means "Log in with GitHub", and your crates.io identity is your GitHub username. The RFC changes that. It introduces usernames that are native to crates.io and independent of linked GitHub accounts, as a prerequisite for eventually supporting login via other identity providers.
```
use active sentence. simplify sentences.

> The implementation has started, but there is still a lot left to do, most visibly the ability to change your crates.io username, and eventually signing in without GitHub. Since all of this touches authentication and account security, we are deliberately taking it slow and rolling these changes out in small, carefully reviewed steps.

Reviewer 2: "signing in without GitHub" isn't part of RFC 3946... don't get people too excited yet ;)

```suggestion
The implementation of crates.io usernames has started, but there is still a lot left to do, most visibly the ability to change your crates.io username. After that is complete, there will be future RFCs and implementation for signing in with identity providers other than GitHub. Since all of this touches authentication and account security, we are deliberately taking it slow and rolling these changes out in small, carefully reviewed steps.
```

## Advisories and Suggestions

> In our January update we introduced the "Security" tab, which shows security advisories from the [RustSec](https://rustsec.org/) database. We have since taken this integration one step further: crates that RustSec has flagged as unmaintained now show a warning banner directly on their crate pages, linking to the corresponding advisory for details and possible alternatives. Thanks to [Dirkjan Ochtman](https://github.com/djc) for implementing this feature!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our [January update] we introduced the "Security" tab, which shows security advisories from the [RustSec](https://rustsec.org/) database. We have since taken this integration one step further: crates that RustSec has flagged as unmaintained now show a warning banner directly on their crate pages, linking to the corresponding advisory for details and possible alternatives. Thanks to [Dirkjan Ochtman](https://github.com/djc) for implementing this feature!
```

![Unmaintained warning banner on the ansi_term crate page](unmaintained-banner.png)

Related to this, some popular crates have been largely absorbed into the Rust standard library over the years, like `lazy_static`, which has been superseded by `std::sync::LazyLock` since Rust 1.80. Crate pages of such crates now show a friendly "You might not need this dependency" banner describing the standard library replacement, and superseded crates in dependency lists get a small light bulb icon with a similar hint.

!["You might not need this dependency" banner on the lazy_static crate page](std-replacement-banner.png)

> The dataset behind this feature lives in the new [rust-lang/std-replacement-data](https://github.com/rust-lang/std-replacement-data) repository, together with a documented inclusion policy: standard library replacements only, every entry must cite the stable `std` API and Rust version, and crate maintainers get a notice-and-comment window before an entry is added. New entries can be proposed upstream and can benefit other tools too.

Reviewer 4: Since someone else will nitpick it, I may as well:

```suggestion
The dataset behind this feature lives in the new [rust-lang/std-replacement-data](https://github.com/rust-lang/std-replacement-data) repository, together with a documented inclusion policy: standard library replacements only, every entry must cite the stable `std`, `core`, or `alloc` API and Rust version, and crate maintainers get a notice-and-comment window before an entry is added. New entries can be proposed upstream and can benefit other tools too.
```

## Ferris

The most delightful change of this cycle: the Ferris on our error pages now follows your mouse cursor with its eyes:

![Ferris' eyes following the mouse cursor on the error page](ferris.gif)

Getting a 404 error on crates.io is now slightly less sad.

## Svelte Frontend Migration Completed

> In our January update, we announced that we were experimenting with porting the crates.io frontend from Ember.js to [Svelte](https://svelte.dev/). This experiment has concluded successfully: the new frontend reached feature parity, went through a [public testing phase](https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2026/04/17/crates-io-svelte-public-testing/) in April, became the default at the beginning of May, and the Ember.js app has been removed from our repository shortly after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our [January update], we announced that we were experimenting with porting the crates.io frontend from Ember.js to [Svelte](https://svelte.dev/). This experiment has concluded successfully: the new frontend reached feature parity, went through a [public testing phase](https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2026/04/17/crates-io-svelte-public-testing/) in April, became the default at the beginning of May, and the Ember.js app has been removed from our repository.
```
No need to specify "shortly after" imo.

> For our users this change was designed to be invisible, since the new frontend is a 1:1 port of the previous design and functionality. For the team and our contributors, however, it is a big deal: the frontend is now built on a more modern framework, which should make it easier for new contributors to get started. It also allows us to iterate faster, as the source code viewer above demonstrates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We designed this change to be invisible for our users, since the new frontend is a 1:1 port of the previous design and functionality. For the team and our contributors, however, it is a big deal: the frontend is now built on a more modern framework, which should make it easier for new contributors to get started. It also allows us to iterate faster, as the source code viewer above demonstrates.
```
active voice

> We want to thank the [Ember.js team](https://emberjs.com/teams/) for a framework that served crates.io well for many years, and the [Svelte team](https://svelte.dev/) for making the transition so enjoyable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to thank the [Ember.js team](https://emberjs.com/teams/) for a framework that served crates.io well for many years, and the Svelte team for making the transition so enjoyable.
```
no need to link to the same homepage as above

## Miscellaneous

> These were some of the more visible changes to crates.io over the past six months, but a lot has happened "under the hood" as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These were some of the more visible changes to crates.io over the past six months, but a lot has happened "under the hood" as well:
```
right? 🤔

> - **Search performance**: Relevance-sorted search queries previously ranked every crate matching the query, which could take 1-2 seconds for short or common search terms. Ranking is now bounded to the 1,000 matching crates with the most recent downloads.

Reviewer 4: This is ambiguous, because "most recent downloads" could mean "the highest number of recent downloads" or "the crates that were most recently downloaded".

We should all be speaking Lojban.

```suggestion
- **Search performance**: Relevance-sorted search queries previously ranked every crate matching the query, which could take 1-2 seconds for short or common search terms. Ranking is now bounded to the 1,000 matching crates with the highest recent download counts.
```

> - **Reverse dependencies performance**: The reverse dependencies endpoint no longer recomputes the full dependent set on every request. It is now served from a precomputed table kept in sync by database triggers, turning an expensive join into a bounded index scan.

Reviewer 4: Again, a "why it matters" suggestion:

```suggestion
- **Reverse dependencies performance**: The reverse dependencies endpoint no longer recomputes the full dependent set on every request. It is now served from a precomputed table kept in sync by database triggers, turning an expensive join into a bounded index scan and greatly reducing the chance of getting a timeout error.
```

- **New ARCHITECTURE.md**: If you've ever wondered how crates.io actually works, our [`ARCHITECTURE.md`](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/blob/main/docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) document got a complete rewrite. It is now organized around the high-level systems that make up crates.io and how they fit together, and includes walkthroughs of what happens when you run `cargo publish`, why a typical crate download never touches our API servers, and how download counts are derived from CDN access logs.

> - **Definition lists**: READMEs now render Markdown definition lists, a widely used Markdown extension. Our markdown renderer [comrak](https://crates.io/crates/comrak) already supported them, the extension just wasn't enabled yet. Thanks to [@mistaste](https://github.com/mistaste) for this contribution!

Reviewer: I don't know what definition lists are. Can you link to docs or an example?
or maybe the PR implementing it which I guess must have screenshots.

- **CDN cache tags**: Files uploaded to our static CDN now carry cache-tag metadata, allowing us to invalidate all cached files of a crate or a specific release in a single operation, instead of issuing one invalidation per file URL.

- **Caching improvements**: We removed a global `Vary: Cookie` response header that was preventing our CDNs from caching public API responses and frontend assets effectively. Per-user responses now use `Cache-Control: no-store` instead, resulting in better cache hit rates at the CDN edge.

> - **Accessibility**: We have put a bit of effort into making crates.io friendlier to screen readers: decorative icons are now hidden from the accessibility tree, heading hierarchies have been fixed, and lists are marked up as proper lists. ARIA snapshot tests now ensure that regressions can't slip in unnoticed.

Reviewer 4: "A bit of effort" could sound a little dismissive. I know you're trying to imply that this isn't a completed project, but can we go with something like (switch the last sentence out with whatever wording you prefer):

```suggestion
- **Accessibility**: We have made crates.io friendlier to screen readers: decorative icons are now hidden from the accessibility tree, heading hierarchies have been fixed, and lists are marked up as proper lists. ARIA snapshot tests now ensure that regressions can't slip in unnoticed. We plan to continue to improve crates.io accessibility over the coming months.
```

> - **Git index performance**: The background worker's local clone of the git index is now a bare and shallow repository, eliminating roughly 250,000 checked-out files and the full commit history from its disk. The periodic index squashing now goes through the GitHub API instead of generating large git packs locally, which had previously caused out-of-memory failures on the production worker.

Reviewer 4: Why it matters:

```suggestion
- **Git index performance**: The background worker's local clone of the git index is now a bare and shallow repository, eliminating roughly 250,000 checked-out files and the full commit history from its disk, improving its performance as we see increased rates of crate publication. The periodic index squashing now goes through the GitHub API instead of generating large git packs locally, which had previously caused out-of-memory failures on the production worker.
```

## Feedback

> We hope you enjoyed this update on the development of crates.io. If you have any feedback or questions, please let us know on [Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/318791-t-crates-io) or [GitHub](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/discussions). We are always happy to hear from you and are looking forward to your feedback!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you enjoyed this update on the development of crates.io. If you have any feedback or questions, please let us know on [Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/318791-t-crates-io) or [GitHub](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/discussions). We are always happy to hear from you and are looking forward to your feedback!

[January update]: @/crates-io-development-update-2026-01/index.md
```
